# Molecular Analysis and Predictive Modelling of COVID-19 Inhibitors, and Risk Assessment of COVID-19 using RNA Sequences and Symptoms Profile

Molecular Analysis and Predictive Modelling of COVID-19 Inhibitors is a scientific and research focused topic that pertains to the study of potential drugs or compounds that can inhibit the activity of COVID-19 virus. This field of research combines molecular biology, computational chemistry, and data science to identify, analyze, and predict molecules that could serve as effective inhibitors of the virus. Risk Assessment of COVID-19 using RNA Sequences and Symptoms Profile is helpful for early detection and accurate diagnosis of COVID-19.<br>
## Introduction

The delay in administering COVID vaccinations to affected individuals had been a significant concern, with various factors contributing to this issue. The notable challenge has been that the scientists need to practically test a vast number of drugs to check which one is efficient in inhibiting the virus. This delay in finding out the drug can be reduced by predictive analysis. To reduce this time, machine learning would be a good tool with a fact that we can predict the most promising drugs based on the trained dataset, thereby narrowing down the selection of drugs for testing, which makes the process faster, and more accurate based on the data which we have trained.
This project presents three modelling approaches. They are Inhibitory Prediction, Diagnostic, and Symptomatic. The first approach is to predict the most promising drug which can inhibit COVID-19. The second approach is to determine if a patient has COVID-19 or any of its variants. The third approach is to analyse the symptoms of COVID-19, which helps in the early detection and diagnosis.
<br>
## Dataset Description
In this project, three datasets have been consolidated, first dataset has two columns of interest, the pIC50 value and SMILES notation. Second one is the RNA Sequences of COVID-19 virus. Third one gives the clinical symptoms commonly associated with COVID-19 virus.<br>
### Inhibitory Prediction Dataset
As mentioned above, this dataset focuses on the two columns of interest, the pIC50 value, which gives a quantitative measure of how much of a substance is needed to inhibit a biological process or component (in this case COVID-19) by 50%, and SMILES (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System) which is a chemical notation which represents a chemical structure in a way that can be used by a computer. This dataset has 110 rows. 
<br>
### DNA and RNA Sequences of COVID-19 Virus
This dataset contains 47,400 unique RNA sequences of the COVID-19 virus. These sequences are used as a reference for understanding the genetic characteristics of the virus and provide a basis to determine the presence of the virus in an individual's DNA.<br>
### Symptom Profiles Dataset
The third dataset contains information on the clinical symptoms commonly associated with COVID-19 virus. This dataset helps in the early detection and diagnosis of the COVID-19 virus. This Dataset has 5,400 rows.<br>
## Methodology 
1. Inhibitory Prediction
   * First, this dataset is cleaned by removing NULL values.
   * Since this dataset has very less data, Conditional Tabular Generative Adversarial Network (CTGAN) is used to generate synthetic data with similar statistical properties to real data. Using the CTGAN library from Python, 10000 rows are generated and stored as a different Dataset.
   * Then, PubChemPy library is imported, using which, validation is carried out. Since SMILES notation represents chemical structures, CTGAN might generate structures that are not chemically valid. Hence by using this Library, chemically invalid compounds are discarded and the updated dataset is stored for further use.
   * Next, based on the SMILES notation of a give compound, its features like Molecular Formula, IUPAC name, Exact mass, Molecular Mass, Steric quadrupoles (which gives dimensions of the compound), volume, number of Hydrogen bond doners and acceptors, and many more are extracted using PubChemPy.
   * Using this updated dataset, a Multiple Linear Regression model is generated by taking all the parameters other than pIC50 value as X, which are Independent Variables and the pIC50 value as Y, which is the Dependent variable.
   * A ROXIE query is created, which takes in the SMILES notation of a drug from the user, in the backend, generates all the features of that drug using PubChemPy, predicts the value of pIC50 using the trained model, and outputs it.
2. Diagnostic
   * The RNA Sequences of COVID-19 Virus dataset has a column called as Accession ID, using which the RNA Sequence of COVID-19 Virus is obtained.
   * A ROXIE query is created which takes an input of this ID from the user, compares this value with each value from the dataset, if the ID is present in the dataset, then it prints “COVID-19 Virus Positive” else it prints “COVID-19 Virus Negative”.
3. Symptomatic
   * The Symptom Profiles dataset provides the symptoms of 5,400 patients, with a portion of them who suffered from COVID-19.
   * Using this data, a Logistic Regression model is generated, which takes the symptoms’ values as independent variables X, and the predicted value, if the patient has COVID-19 virus or not, as dependant variable Y.
   * A ROXIE query is created in the form of a chatbot, where a user needs to answer the questions, and based on his answers, this model will predict and output the Y value which tells if the patient is affected with the virus or not.
<br>
Each of the three approaches includes the incorporation of a public website, making it user-friendly for people to access the ROXIE service.

## Conclusion
The key issue in the delay of COVID-19 vaccine was the time-consuming drug testing process. However, using this Inhibitory Prediction approach speeds up the task, enabling to find an efficient drug for testing in a very less time.<br>
By incorporating the Diagnostic and Symptomatic approaches into a user-friendly interface, it makes COVID-19 risk assessment more accessible to a wider audience. This empowers individuals to take measures to protect their health.<br>
Incorporating data driven solutions like this becomes important at the times of global crisis, ultimately saving countless affected lives.<br>
